# bq -- simple batch queueing command

<!--ts-->
   * [quick overview](#quick-overview)
   * [workers](#workers)
   * [tasks](#tasks)
   * [status](#status)
   * [cleanup](#cleanup)
   * [using a different queue](#using-a-different-queue)
   * [files in the QDIR](#files-in-the-qdir)

<!-- Added by: sitaram, at: Fri 27 Sep 2019 06:21:39 AM IST -->

<!--te-->

----

This is now, effectively, version 3 of my "batch queue" command, and it was
finally deemed simple enough to move into my new "notes" repo than be on its
own!

Usage is very simple, and should fit all those posts I saw where people
appeared to want exactly this, but were being directed to "batch" (which won't
queue), or told to use a semicolon (seriously!), and so on.

The **only** tool that really fits the bill for all those needs is
task-spooler, which, according to `rpm -qi task-spooler` on my system, is at
<http://vicerveza.homeunix.net/~viric/soft/ts>.  It is much more powerful than
this program, while also being very easy to use.

The only reason I wrote this, despite knowing of task-spooler, is that I often
work on machines where I am not allowed to install whatever I want, so having
something that just uses bash is very useful.

# quick overview

    # start a worker
    bq -w
    # start a couple of jobs
    bq some long running command
    bq another command  # will run after the previous one completes
    # examine the output directory at any time
    bq                              # uses vifm as the file manager
    export BQ_FILEMANAGER=mc; bq    # env var overrides default

    # you can only run one simple command; if you have a command with shell
    # meta characters (;, &, &&, ||, >, <, etc), do this:
    bq bash -c 'echo hello; echo there >junk.$RANDOM'

# workers

`bq -w` starts a worker.  If you want more workers, run it multiple times.  If
you queue commands without starting a worker, they'll just sit in the queue
until you start one.

To reduce the number of workers, run `bq -k`.  The next worker that comes
round looking for a task to run will exit, reducing the worker count by 1.

You can stop the queue by stopping all the workers.  Tasks still in queue will
be picked up when you start a worker again.

# tasks

Start a task by just prefixing the command with "bq":

    bq youtube-dl https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vohrz14S6JE

If a worker is free it will start running immediately, otherwise it will run
when a worker becomes free.

# status

Running `bq` without any arguments runs the vifm file manager on the "Q
directory".  The directory and file names are mostly self-explanatory, and
you'll see the view changing as commands complete, new ones start, etc.  See
the "files in the QDIR" section below for more on this if you need.

You can override the default of "vifm" by setting `BQ_FILEMANAGER` to the
file manager of your choice, including any options you need.

# cleanup

You have to clean up the ".1", ".2", and ".exitcode=N" files yourself.  Bq cannot
know when you're no longer interested in the output of some long-ago run
command :)

# using a different queue

The default queue is "default".  You can create other queues if you need:

    bq -w                   # start a worker in default queue
    bq -q net -w            # start a worker in "net" queue
    bq -q cpu -w            # start a worker in "cpu" queue
    bq sleep 30             # runs in default queue
    bq -q net wget ...      # runs in "net" queue
    bq -q cpu ffmpeg ...    # runs in "cpu" queue

There is no sanity checking on the name you choose; please use a simple word
like in the examples.

I must also add that I have never yet *needed* multiple queues.  I do have
differing needs, but never at the same time, so just the default has sufficed
so far.

# files in the QDIR

The Q directory, which is by default `/dev/shm/bq-$USER-default`, contains all
the files that make bq tick.  An explanation of what they are follows.

(Side note: why `/dev/shm`?  I prefer /dev/shm for output files; I assume most
jobs output is small enough (otherwise you would have redirected it!) I'm more
interested in making sure that this does not touch the disk (cause disk IO, or
"wake up" the disk if it was asleep), because that's the way I roll!)

**Worker**: for each worker, there is a PID file in the `w/` subdirectory.  It
contains a list of all the commands that this worker ran till now.  When a
worker exits, this file is renamed to have a ".exited" extension.

**Tasks**: each task has an **ID**, which looks like
`1549791234.23456.ffmpeg`.  The first bit is a timestamp (`date +%s`), the
next is the PID that submitted the job, the third bit is the first word of the
command (in our example, "ffmpeg").

Here's the lifecycle of a task in terms of the filenames you will see:

*   A task starts out as file `q/$ID` when it is in queue, waiting for a free
    worker.  The first line of this file is the PWD when the task was
    submitted, the second line contains the command to be run, and subsequent
    lines have the arguments, one per line.

*   When it starts running, this file is pulled out of the `q` directory and
    renamed to `$ID.running.wPID`, where "wPID" is the PID of the worker that
    picked up this task.  In addition, two more files, `$ID.1` and `$ID.2`,
    are created that contain the stdout and stderr of the task, respectively.

*   When the task completes, this file is renamed to `$ID.exitcode=N`, where N
    is the exitcode of the task.

    For convenience, all files for tasks that have completed successfully,
    i.e., exitcode was 0, will be moved to a subdirectory called "OK".  This
    lets you clear out all these files in one go if you trust the exitcode and
    don't need to check the actual outputs.
