# sf -- wrapper around "find"

`sf` is a wrapper around the find command.

You might notice that `argmod-example-2.sh` is symlinked to `sf` in this
directory; that is because `sf` is a great example (in fact the longest one I
have in my toolbox) of [`argmod`](argmod.mkd), which you should totally look
up right now!

`sf` was borne out of frustration with the find command's idiosyncracies:

-   why can't -iname and -iregex match on *part of* the name/path (IOW, why do
    I have to always prefix/suffix `*` or `.*`, respectively)?
-   why "mmin" and "mtime"?  Why not use only one option and simply add a "d"
    suffix to the number instead
-   why does -size want lowercase k but uppercase M and G?
-   while we're on the topic, who the hell uses "blocks" anymore?
-   and finally (tongue-in-cheek) why are the most common options so long and
    tedious to type?

But the most important thing `sf` does for me is sort the output by file mod
time ("mtime"), inode change time ("ctime"), or size.  Literally the most
common thing I do with `sf` is look for the largest files, or the most
recently changed/touched ones.

## side note: why not "fd"?

To be honest, the [`fd`](https://github.com/sharkdp/fd) command, which is now
available almost everywhere except curmudgeonly versions like CentOS 7, could
replace a lot of this for me.  What `fd` seriously lacks is the ability to
search based on inode change time ("ctime" as opposed to "mtime").  It would
also be nice if it had a builtin printf feature but that can be worked around.

It doesn't help that I have *several* CentOS 7 servers (even some CentOS 6)
that I have to occasionally work on, and I just cannot live without, for
example, `sf -c -10d` (find all files whose inodes were changed less than 10
days ago, printing the ctime in a sortable format along with the filename).

(However, fd is getting better every day, so who knows...!)
