# tmt -- track my time

There are lots of tools to track your time.  As with everything else, there's a Goldilocks thing going on -- they either have too many features, or too little :)

My needs:

-   quickly start and stop tasks
-   see a summary of hours spent today (or any other day)
-   everything else can be done using an editor !

I hate making UIs (in fact I've never made one).  But I love `fzf`, so why not?

If you're not familiar with fzf, you may prefer to watch the asciinema at <https://asciinema.org/a/392147> (or download it from [here](tmt.cast) and play it at double speed (`asciinema play -s 2 tmt.cast`).  [NOTE: for some reason when I play it locally, it hangs when it enters the part where it opens up an editor.  Please hit the space bar when that happens.  The online version does not have this problem].

If you **are** familiar with `fzf`, the following textual description may suffice for you to get going.  This is the same information that is available if you hit `F1` in the program.

----

-   **Currently running task**: a task is "running" if the second HH:MM field
    is just `"_____"`.  At most one task can be running at any time.  If no
    task is running, it means you're "off the clock" (e.g., at end of day).

-   **F7** creates a new task with whatever you typed into the fzf query field, and marks it as "running".
    The first word is considered a "TAG" and the rest is "text".  Any task
    previously marked as running is given an end time to mark it as stopped.

-   **ENTER** on a stopped task resumes it.  As with F7, any previously running
    task is marked stopped.

-   **ENTER** on a running task stops it.  Now you're off the clock (nothing
    is running).

-   The **preview window** shows tag-wise totals and grand totals for the date
    on the current line.  If you type in an fzf query string, the totals will
    be further reduced to those matching the query

*   The **preview window** shows two sets of tag-wise totals and grand totals:

    *   one for the date on the current line, filtered by the fzf query string
        if you typed one in
    *   one for all *selected* rows (or current row if you did not select any)

    REMINDER: multi-select using TAB and "select all" using Ctrl-A are enabled.

-   **F4** to change text, fix timestamps, add notes and comments, etc., in
    your \$EDITOR.  Tmt only looks at lines starting with YYYY-MM (e.g.,
    2021-01); everything else is ignored so you can type in whatever you want!

    -   WARNING: there is NO ERROR CHECKING on dates and times!
    -   WARNING: don't remove the hard tabs separating the fields on the lines
        that tmt *does* care about :)

Caveat:

-   doesn't support tasks crossing midnight; if you *really* need it let me know

